History
Ekwendeni is situated in the north-eastern part of Mzimba District, which is in the Northern Region of Malawi. It is 22 KM away from Mzuzu, the third city of Malawi. It is a small but busy and growing trading centre situated on the tarred M1 road, which is the main transport link between Tanzania, in the north, and the rest of southern Africa and Malawi. The surrounding area is rural and one in which the local economy is based on subsistence farming.  There are some tobacco estates in the surrounding area, and other land is cultivated by smallholders.  
Medical services began at Ekwendeni in the late 1880s, and the hospital celebrated its centenary in 1989. Medical services started under Dr Walter A. Elmslie in the late 1880s, under the supervision of the Free Church of Scotland. In 1963, the Church of Scotland handed the running of the institution over to the National Church – Livingstonia CCAP Synod.  
The hospital has one satellite unit, at Enukweni, Enukweni is about 25 Km north of Ekwendeni along Karonga tarmac road. It has a predominately rural population of 15,754 from 136 villages with 3,482 households. Ekwendeni Hospital established Maternity Unit in 1934 with the sole aim of reducing maternal morbidity and mortality rates. The demand of other health care services by the community around Enukweni besides Maternal and Neonatal services obliged the Hospital Management to open an Out-patient Department (OPD) in May 2017. The people around Enukweni have greatly appreciated the opening of the OPD and highly patronized it, despite having a Government Health Centre within a stone throw. It has 20 staff members, one full-time Clinical Officer, 3 full-time nurses and support staff residing with the premises, some of them stay in rented houses. 
The Synod of Livingstonia also opened Kavuzi Health Centre in collaboration with CHAM and the Ministry of Health in August 2016 in its fulfilment of its mission statement of reaching out to the unreached and less privileged communities irrespective of religious background. Kavuzi Health Centre is in Nkhata Bay, about 39 km southeast of Ekwendeni along the Mzuzu–Nkhata Bay tarmac road. It serves a predominantly rural population of 12,052 people from 5 villages with 1,955 households. 
The Synod of Livingstonia has added another clinic at Bandawe under Ekwendeni Hospital Management. Bandawe is in Nkhata Bay, about 125 km south of Ekwendeni along the Nkhata Bay–Nkhota Kota M5 tarmac road. It serves a predominantly rural population of 19,042 people from 10 villages with over 3,000 households. 
Bandawe Clinic started in 1881, soon after the coming of Dr Robert Laws, who had settled at Bandawe Old Station. He soon realised the need for health services in the surrounding community. He, among other things, established a fully-fledged medical centre. The services operated until the mission was relocated to Livingstonia in 1894.  

Our Mission, Vision, Core Values & Overall Strategic Objective
Our Mission
To provide holistic quality healthcare services based on the healing ministry of Jesus Christ.
Our Vision
To be a leading centre of excellence in provision of quality and compassionate patient centred care for the glory of Christ.
Core Values
We at Ekwendeni Mission Hospital are defined by our values of:
•	Christ-centered: We emulate the values Christ of love, honesty, equity, compassion, and kindness.
•	Commitment: We work beyond call of duty, sacrifice own resources, consistently show dedication to tasks and work, perform exact expectations and manage time well.
•	Integrity: We do the right thing at the right time whether someone watching or not, following up with ethical issues and strong moral principles. 
•	Transparency and Accountability: We are open enough and answerable, taking responsibility for our actions.
•	Professionalism: We have positive attitude, interaction and rapport with staff at all levels and the people we serve.
The Christ-centeredness of our hospital is what sets us apart from any other organization. This is the core belief that drives all that we do. 
Our overall strategic objective that will help us attain this vision on our journey to 2029, which was launched in 2024 is to improve our quality health care score and become a COHSASA accredited Hospital by 30th September, 2029. 

Affiliations and partners
Ekwendeni Mission Hospital is affiliated to the CCAP Synod of Livingstonia, under the health department and we are also a member of the Christian Health Association of Malawi (CHAM), an ecumenical organisation which is owned by two mother bodies: the Episcopal Conference of Malawi (ECM) and the Malawi Council of Churches (MCC). CHAM is a non-profit, non-governmental umbrella organisation of Christian-owned health facilities in Malawi. The history of CHAM dates back to 1966 when it was established to advise churches on healthcare issues following an observation by stakeholders that churches were doing a commendable job in healthcare delivery in the country but lacked proper coordination, cooperation and guidance. Therefore, the institution was established with the aim of promoting the healing ministry of Jesus Christ through the provision of health care services to all Malawians through its member units across the country. Every health facility that is a member of a CHAM affiliate pays yearly membership fees to the CHAM Secretariat.  
Partners
Currently, some of our partners in service: Church of Scotland, Presbyterian Church of Canada, Presbyterian Church of USA, Presbyterian Church of Island, Medical Benevolent Foundation (MBF), Presbyterian World Service & Development (PWS & D), Cypressa - Wilde Gease, Steven Lewis Foundation, People Against Poverty, Church of Scotland – Geneva, Jane & Hans, Rev Dr David and Mrs Maureen Irwin, MACRO, Light to care.

Staff Establishment
The hospital has a staff establishment of 230 members, excluding those from the health centres, but only 220 positions were filled in the year under review. These staff members run the hospital’s curative and primary health care programmes. The majority of staff members are Malawians, with very few expatriates. The composition ranges from doctors, clinical officers, medical assistants, nurses, executive officers (administration), support staff and others.  

Wards & Services offered
Ekwendeni Hospital started as a small dispensary and slowly developed into a hospital, with the most recent complex being opened in 1986. This has again been enlarged over recent years, now having 250 bed spaces as follows: Male Ward (25), Female Ward (25), Maternity Ward (90), Children's Ward (45), NRU (11) TB ward (24), Private Wing (10) and a home for pregnant women (20)  
Clinical Services
Maternity & Child Health
Comprehensive maternity services (90 bed maternity ward), neonatal unit (NRU), immunisation and antenatal care.
Inpatient Care
Male, female, children and TB wards with specialist nursing teams and visiting clinicians.
Outpatient & Clinics
Busy OPD providing general outpatient care, chronic care clinics, HIV & AIDS services, mental health and family planning.
Primary Health Care Programmes
•	Maternal & Child Health
•	Water & Sanitation
•	Savings & Credit Schemes & Food Security
•	HIV & AIDS, Malaria prevention
•	Saving Newborn Lives, Micronutrients & Nutrition
•	Mental Health, Family Planning
The primary health care programmes started way back in the late 1980s with a catchment area of about 400 square kilometres with a predominantly rural population of 45,000, but now the catchment area has grown to 600 square kilometres with a predominantly rural population of approximately 95,000, and it also acts as a referral centre for another 100,000 people. The programmes range from Maternal and Child Health, Water & Sanitation, Savings & Credit Scheme, Food Security, HIV & AIDS, Malaria, Saving Newborn Lives, Micronutrient and Health, Mental Health, Family Planning and others, each programme being headed by a coordinator under the supportive supervision of the Primary Health Care Director.  
Referral & Transport
Ambulance referral for complicated obstetric cases; mobile phone communication used for triage and referrals.


Events

Donations
Facilities at the hospital have steadily improved over the years, thanks to God’s blessing and the support of many donor agencies and partner churches. Basic services, such as piped water, electricity and telephones, as well as internet services, are available. We also have a diesel generator, which is a great help in times of blackouts. 
We praise God for all the gifts and support of the many ‘donor’ agencies that have assisted us over the years. We hope and pray that the hospital is a witness to God, and we aim to serve the surrounding communities to the best of our abilities.

Contact & Visit
Location: Ekwendeni, Mzimba District — 22 km from Mzuzu on the M1 tarmac road.
For appointments, referrals or general enquiries, please use the form below or call the hospital number.

Att: The Hospital Director
Ekwendeni Mission Hospital
P.O. Box 19
Ekwendeni
ndaghamushani@gmail.com
+265999397034 or +265888181541

Pictures
 
Logos for the facility
  


 


 




 


  

